---
layout: page
title: "About"
description: "A little bit about me."
header-img: "img/about-bg.jpg"
---

I am currently a third year Software Engineering undergrad at
Concordia University in Montreal. Ever since the moment I started
reading my first textbook about programming, I have not been able to
quench my thirst for more.

During my first year in university, I studied mostly Java and Android,
introduced myself to Linux, and had an internship with Radialpoint. In
the second year, I did a lot of web programming (mostly
HTML/CSS/JavaScript with a PHP backend) which got me my second
internship at GSoft. On a personal level, my most significant
achievement at the time was to contribute to the Node.js project,
where I fixed a bug in the stream module (see the
[thread](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/2616)). Even though the
pull request was code reviewed, it never actually got merged in the
project. Regardless, I learned a lot about how open-source projects
work and thoroughly enjoyed the experience.

In January 2016, I landed an internship at Microsoft, where I worked
on a project involving [Muzik's new smart
heaphones](https://www.muzikconnect.com/). These headphones have an
integrated accelerometer, four programmable buttons and swipe
gestures. They can communicate with a device using Bluetooth. The task
given to my team was to design and implement a software development
kit for Android and iOS that would abstract away the nitty-gritty
details of the Bluetooth protocol and provide a clean
[API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_programming_interface). I
was tasked with designing and implementing the Android library.

In my spare time, I love reading textbooks on various computer science
topics. The latest one I completed was the famous [Structure and
Interpretations of Computer
Programs](https://www.amazon.ca/Structure-Interpretation-Computer-Programs-Abelson/dp/0262510871). This
book uses the Scheme programming language to teach fundamental
concepts about data and procedures which apply to all programming
languages. In the second part of the book, we write an interpreter and
a compiler for Scheme in Scheme. It is a startling experience.

I am currently reading [The Linux Programming
Interface](https://www.amazon.ca/Linux-Programming-Interface-System-Handbook/dp/1593272200),
in which I am learning Linux and its system call interface
in-depth. In parallel, I am studying the Linux implementation of
[libuv](http://libuv.org/), the library which Node.js uses to manage
asynchronous I/O. I also managed to
[contribute](https://github.com/libuv/libuv/pull/1060): I exposed a
private Windows-only function that translated system error codes into
libuv error codes, implemented the UNIX version of it, updated the
documentation and added a test!

## Contact me

You can either e-mail me at laferriere.phil@gmail.com or
[message me on
LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/in/philippe-laferri√®re-b92b5684).
