---
layout:     post
title:      "The JOS kernel: Memory Management"
subtitle:   "Implementation of memory management in the JOS kernel"
date:       2017-07-22 11:45:00
author:     "Philippe Laferriere"
header-img: "img/linux-bg.jpg"
---

The JOS kernel is an already partially implemented kernel that students of [MIT
course 6.828](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2016/overview.html) finish
implementing in a series of labs. I am not an MIT student, however I was still
able to complete the course as it is made fully available online for all to
benefit. In this article, I will explain how the JOS kernel memory management
subsystem works, providing examples from my implementation, which can be found
on [my github](https://github.com/plafer/jos-kernel).

*Disclaimer: Although I will do my best to provide background information about
the x86 architecture, there is no way around reading [the
manual](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2016/readings/i386/toc.htm) (note that
the 80386 manual has everything you need, and is pretty thin compared to the
recent manuals). But I don't expect you to go off and read the entire manual as
a prerequisite to this article; I will simply point to the right sections which
will serve as supplementary information.*

Whenever you're dealing with memory management, there are typically two main
things you need to worry about: physical pages management, and virtual
memory. The typical Operating Systems 101 course will only introduce you to
virtual memory; however, you can't fully understand virtual memory unless you
know how to manage physical pages. We'll go in depth into each one, starting
with physical pages management.

## Physical Pages Management

Conventional operating systems are great at abstracting memory away from the
application programmer to give the illusion that there is an infinite amount
available (I say *conventional* because there are other designs possible - see
[exokernels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exokernel)). Of course, `malloc()`
can return `NULL` which means "out of memory", but you get the point. However,
when you're implementing the operating system, you're the one who has to provide
that illusion, and there isn't *actually* an infinite amount of memory
available. Welcome to physical page management.

So the first question to ask is: how do I know how much physical memory is
available? The PC platform being the historical mess that it is, there isn't one
clean, API-like way to query the hardware and get a clean "2GB" answer. To quote
the [book](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2016/xv6/book-rev9.pdf) about another educational operating system written by
the instructors of the same course, the xv6:

> On the x86, there are at least three common algorithms [to determine the
amount of memory available]: the first is to probe the physical address space
looking for regions that behave like memory, preserving the values written to
them; the second is to read the number of kilobytes of memory out of a known
16-bit location in the PCâ€™s non-volatile RAM; and the third is to look in BIOS
memory for a memory layout table left as part of the multiprocessor
tables. Reading the memory layout table is complicated.

To avoid complications, the JOS kernel simply assumes that there is 256MB of
memory. So, now that we know how much memory we have, how do are we going to
manage it? To put it in big picture terms, we keep track in some kernel data
structure of which chunks of memory are currently in use, and which are not. To
make our lives easier (and to work with the MMU, which we'll introduce in the
next section), we'll think of memory in 4Kb chunks, which we call *pages*. Every
page will be marked as either in use, or not in use. For example, in our data
structure, we'll have that page 0 (bytes [0, 4096[) is in use, page 1 (bytes
[4096, 8192[) isn't, and so on.

Let's examine the specific implementation of the JOS kernel.

    // kern/pmap.c

    struct PageInfo *pages; // Physical page state array

We keep track of all the memory pages in a global array `pages`. For each
physical page, there is a corresponding `struct PageInfo` in this array (*i.e.*
`pages[0]` refers to page 0, `pages[1]` refers to page 1, and so on). Note that
the `pages` array is a C pointer only because we dynamically allocate it
instead of statically allocating it.

    // inc/memlayout.h

    struct PageInfo {
    	// Next page on the free list.
    	struct PageInfo *pp_link;

    	// pp_ref is the count of pointers (usually in page table entries)
    	// to this page, for pages allocated using page_alloc.
    	uint16_t pp_ref;
    };

A `struct PageInfo` keeps track of two things: a free list link, and a reference
count. The convention is as follows: if the reference count is 0, then the page
is free and is on the free list. So why do we keep a reference count; wouldn't a
flag `is_in_use` be enough? To answer this question, we'll need to understand
virtual memory, so we'll come back to it.

      // kern/pmap.c

      static struct PageInfo *page_free_list;	// Free list of physical pages

Along with the `pages` array, we have a pointer `page_free_list` that points
into the `pages` array at the first free page. The rest of the free list is
traversed using the pages' `pp_link` pointer.

So in general, how do we use the `pages` array? Well, if you want to know if
page `n` is in use, you access `pages[n]`. Or, if you just want a free page, you
take the one pointed to by `page_free_list` (and update `page_free_list` to
point to the subsequent item on the list).

Yes, it's that simple. To convince you that there isn't more to it, let's look
at the function that other subsystems can use to allocate a page:

    // kern/pmap.c

    struct PageInfo *
    page_alloc(int alloc_flags)
    {
        struct PageInfo *alloced_page;

        // Are we out of free pages?
        if (page_free_list == NULL)
        	return NULL;

        // Take the first page off the list and update page_free_list
        alloced_page = page_free_list;
        page_free_list = page_free_list->pp_link;
        alloced_page->pp_link = NULL;

        // If the caller wants it zero'ed out, zero it out.
        // Note: the page2kva trick has to do with virtual memory, so don't
        // worry about it
        if (alloc_flags & ALLOC_ZERO) {
        	memset(page2kva(alloced_page), 0, PGSIZE);
        }

        // Update the number of allocated pages (just for statistics' sake)
        num_page_alloced++;

        // Return the page
        return alloced_page;
    }

That's all that there is to it! We take all the available memory, divide it up
into 4Kb chunks, and keep track of which pages are in use and which aren't,
giving out pages to other subsystems on demand.

## Virtual Memory

Virtual memory is probably the hardest thing to understand about memory
management, for one reason: it is misunderstood by most people who teach it. The
first hit I get when Googling "what is virtual memory?" [gives
me](http://searchstorage.techtarget.com/definition/virtual-memory):

>Virtual memory is a memory management capability of an OS that uses hardware
 and software to allow a computer to compensate for physical memory shortages by
 temporarily transferring data from random access memory (RAM) to disk storage.

This is WRONG. That is NOT what virtual memory is. The trick described here is
*one of the things* that is enabled by the virtual memory abstraction, but it
definitely isn't *virtual memory*. That being said, here is my humble attempt to
explain what virtual memory *really* is.

Virtual memory is the decoupling between the addresses stored in a program and
physical addresses. I'll let that one sink in... So what do I mean by that?
Well, when your CPU is instructed by your program to, for example, store `0` at
address `0xFF203E76`, it doesn't go to address `0xFF203E76` directly. Instead,
it sends `0xFF203E76` through the *MMU (the hardware component that manages
virtual memory)* to get the physical address to which `0xFF203E76` is mapped -
say `0x00033223`. `0x00033223` is where it will store the `0`.

<img src="{{ site.url }}/img/paging-mmu.gif"/>

The neat thing is that the MMU relies on data structures of a predefined format
set up by the operating system to perform this translation... In other words,
the operating system decides which (virtual) addresses a program can access, and
where these (virtual) addresses map to in (physical) memory. This is also known
as an *address space*.

So what's the relation between the "transferring data from RAM to disk storage"
trick everyone thinks virtual memory is and *actual* virtual memory? Let me
first go into detail into how operating systems set up virtual memory on the
x86 architecture, and then I'll be able to give a more detailed answer.

### Virtual Memory on the x86 architecture

*For more information, refer to [the
 manual](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2016/readings/i386/s05_02.htm)*.

As mentioned above, the MMU is a hardware component. Therefore, the operating
system must conform to its interface that is literally set in stone (or, in
silicon, to be more precise). One of the components of its interface is how it
thinks about addresses.

Remember how we divided our physical memory into 4Kb pages? Well, the MMU does
the same. However, instead of indexing the whole memory with one big array like
we did with the `pages` array, it uses 1024 page tables that each track 1024
pages, and a page directory that tracks all the page tables (for a total of 1024
\* 1024 = 1,048,576 pages, the maximum amount addressable by a 32-bit
address). For example, to access page 0, you would access page table 0 in the
page directory at index 0, and then page 0 in that page table at index 0.

<img src="{{ site.url }}/img/x86-addr-format.gif"/>

Addresses are then divided as shown in the image above: the last 10 bits serve
as an index into the page directory, the 10 bits before that serve as an index
into the page table, and finally the first 12 bits serve as an index into the
actual page. This process is shown here:

<img id="pg-trans" src="{{ site.url }}/img/x86-addr-translation.gif"/>

Remember how I said that the operating system controls the MMU by carefully
setting up data structures of a predefined format? The data structures in
question are the page directory and the page tables. The format of a page
directory or page table entry is also well defined by the hardware, as we'll see
shortly. Now assume that the operating system has just finished setting up a new
address space (*i.e.* a page directory and page tables are set up and sitting in
memory). How do we tell the MMU where our page directory is so that the MMU can
start using our new page directory to resolve virtual addresses? Well, we need
to load the (physical) address of our page directory into a system register
called CR3 (as seen in the bottom left corner of the image above). As soon as we
do that, subsequent addresses are translated using this new page directory.

Finally, what does a page directory/page table entry look like? It's basically an
address to the page table or to a page of memory, respectively, along with a
bunch of flags.

<img src="{{ site.url }}/img/x86_pgdir.png"/>
*Source: http://wiki.osdev.org/Paging*

And *voilÃ *: that's all there is to virtual memory. Programs are compiled to
instructions that reference virtual addresses. Whenever the CPU needs to access
these addresses, it sends the address through the MMU which traverses the
page directory and page table structures that were carefully set up by the
operating system to find the corresponding physical page to which the address
refers. The CPU then performs its memory access there.

### The Wrong Virtual Memory Definition Revisited

Now, what's that "virtual memory extends physical RAM onto the disk" trick
everyone is talking about? When the CPU sends a virtual address through the MMU
while executing a given user program, the MMU indexes into the page directory or
the subsequent page table as we've just seen. However, if the Present bit of the
page table or page directory entry (see the flags in the image above) is turned
off, the CPU will throw an exception, transferring control back to the operating
system. The operating system then looks in the CR2 special register to find the
address that the user program failed to access; if the address is inside a page
that the operating system had previously moved to disk due to heavy memory
pressure, then the operating system will:

1. Allocate a new physical page (with `page_alloc()`).
2. Copy the contents of the page stored on disk into this newly allocated page.
3. Modify the page table entry to point to this newly allocated page.
4. Transfer control back to the user program, which will repeat the same
instruction, but this time successfully accessing the physical memory page.

Note how this trick is only possible because of the level of indirection
provided by virtual memory. If the CPU accessed physical memory directly, there
would be no way for the operating system to copy the contents of a memory page
to disk in order to reuse the memory page for something else, and bring back
the contents of the original memory page only when the program needs it.

### Virtual memory in the JOS kernel

The goal of this section is only to give a sense of how a virtual memory-related
functions are implemented in the JOS kernel. We'll take as an example
`page_insert()`, which is used to insert a physical page into a page
directory/page table structure.

    // kern/pmap.c

    int
    page_insert(pde_t *pgdir, struct PageInfo *pp, void *va, int perm)
    {
        pte_t *pte;

        // 1.
        pte = pgdir_walk(pgdir, va, 1);
        if (pte == NULL)
        	return -E_NO_MEM;

        // 2.
        pp->pp_ref++;

        // 3.
        page_remove(pgdir, va);

        // 4.
        *pte = page2pa(pp) | perm | PTE_P;
        return 0;
    }

`page_insert()` takes four arguments: `pgdir` a pointer to a page directory in
memory, `pp` a pointer to a `struct PageInfo` which corresponds to the physical page
that is to be inserted, `va` a virtual address to which the physical page is to be
mapped, and `perm` a set of flags (which we won't worry about). Let's walk through the
code.

1. We use the convenient function `pgdir_walk()` to give us a pointer to the
page table entry for the page in which `va` points (See [Figure
5.9](#pg-trans)). `pgdir_walk()` essentially traverses the page directory and
page tables in software the same way that the MMU does it in hardware. The third
argument, `1`, instructs `pgdir_walk()` to create a new empty page table if it
doesn't exist yet. Thus, if it needs to allocate a new page for a page table but
there is no memory pages left, it will return `NULL`.

2. We increment the reference count of the physical page.

3. We remove any physical page that would already be mapped at `va`. That is to
say, if the Present bit is set in the page table entry for `va`, we check the
address stored in the entry (see "Page Directory Entry" image above), decrement
the reference count of the physical page pointed to by the address in the entry,
and unset the Present bit in the page table entry. The net effect is that any
mapped physical page is removed from the address space.

4. Finally, we rewrite the page table entry with `pp`'s physical address, and
the right set of flags. `page2pa()` is a tiny function which calculates the
physical address of a given `struct PageInfo` based on its offset from the
beginning of the `struct PageInfo` array `pages`. It is defined in
`kern/pmap.h`.

Remember when we asked why we used a reference count for physical pages instead
of some `is_in_use` flag? That is because virtual memory allows you to map two
different virtual pages to the same physical page (*i.e.* two different page
table entries contain the same address field). This is known as a *memory
mapping*. Therefore, we need to wait for any mapping to the same physical page
from all the page tables to be removed until we can safely declare the physical
page to be "not in use". To do that, every time we map the physical page in a
page table, we increase the reference count, and every time we remove the
mapping from a page table, we decrease the count. Whenever the count hits 0, the
physical page is considered "not in use".

## Final thoughts

I realize that there's a few textbooks' worth of information crammed up in this
one article. I don't expect anyone without any prior operating systems knowledge
to read this and understand everything. The purpose of the article was to give a
sense of what is involved in implementing a basic operating system. I sometimes
read questions on Quora: "Do you need to know assembly to understand how
operating systems work?". My answer is: if you want to be serious about it then
yes, you certainly do. And not only do you need to know assembly, but you also
need to understand the low level details of the architecture you're working on
(*e.g.* how the MMU works with the page directory and page tables), how programs
are stored in binary format (*e.g.* ELF format), how they are linked, etc. This
might sound like a heavy-duty laundry list, but it's not - it's actually a lot
of fun!

For anyone who would is interested in spending time to actually learn this well,
I'll share my path of how I got there. I first read [The Linux Programming
Interface](https://www.amazon.ca/Linux-Programming-Interface-System-Handbook/dp/1593272200)
to understand what it meant to "program for an operating system". My previous
experience at the time was mostly with Java or web technologies which hide the
operating system from you. It also made me learn C really well by writing a
myriad of programs. Next, I read [Computer Organization and
Design](https://www.amazon.ca/Computer-Organization-Design-MIPS-Interface/dp/0124077269)
to get a good grasp of how computers work at the gate level. Finally, I was
ready for this course ([MIT
6.828](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2016/overview.html)).

Of course, this is only one of many possible paths. Make your own way, and most
importantly, have fun doing it! Happy hacking!
